There was always a profound ambiguity that defined the Mughal shrine which existed in Ayodhya until the afternoon of December 6, 1992. Outwardly, it had all the appearance of a mosque built in the early 16th century. However, inside was a Ram temple that had been functioning as such since the Ram lalla idol was placed there in 1949.

Interestingly, the ambiguity was not entirely a post-Independence phenomenon. The local belief that Babur’s general, Mir Baqi, had built the Babri Masjid on the site of a shrine venerated as Ram’s janmasthan (birthplace) resonated in Avadh at least. However, the loss of the janmasthan didn’t imply that Hindus wiped out its significance from their collective memory. On the perimeter of the mosque they created a Ram Chabutra where they offered puja to Lord Ram. In a way it was akin to Jews praying at the outer wall of the sacred Temple Mount in Jerusalem over which the community had lost control.

The demolition of the Babri shrine in 1992 was admittedly in violation of assurances given to the Supreme Court. However, the removal of the disputed structure and the resumption of puja in a hastily constructed, makeshift temple removed all traces of ambiguity. In an evening broadcast to the nation on the night of the demolition the then Prime Minister P V Narasimha Rao promised to rebuild a mosque on the site, but this assurance lacked any real commitment and was quickly forgotten. Instead, the issue now centred on the construction of a grand temple on the site of the janmasthan. Those opposed to the temple preferred the makeshift temple — surrounded by barricades and restricted entry of devotees — to persist indefinitely, whereas the Ram bhakts wanted an end to judicial prevarication and a categorical judicial order. With the bhoomi pujan on August 5 performed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the long dispute is approaching closure.

The factors that contributed to a local dispute assuming a national character and reshaping politics quite markedly will, naturally, preoccupy future historians. The difference between the reactions to the 1992 demolition and last Wednesday’s bhoomipuja would indicate that India has changed very significantly. If the former was marked by a cocktail of boisterous celebrations, anger and violent protests — recall the Mumbai riots and the serial bomb blasts in early 1993—the latter has been greeted with dignified observance and an anticipation of national reawakening. The Ram temple has entered the realms of common sense, among Hindus at least.

In his speech at Ayodhya, Modi described the Ram temple movement as a manifestation of the nationalist impulses that drove the freedom movement. Additionally, he characterised the proposed temple as a “modern representation of our culture.” The sceptics have been outraged. They have expressed fears that the removal of ambiguity in Ayodhya is a metaphor for a Hindu state.

The culmination of the freedom struggle in 1947 led to the establishment of a political order that was laid out in the Constitution of 1950. The Constitution, among other things, defined the parameters of public life and loosely identified the values that would define the new republic. Yet, while the Constitution spelt out the ‘rule of law’ and established equal citizenship — with some special privileges for communities suffering historical disadvantage — it naturally steered clear of the larger issue of nationhood.

This understandable silence was partly filled by the initial adherence to what can loosely be called the Nehruvian consensus that was marked by the three pillars of secularism, socialism and non-alignment. However, with many of the earlier shibboleths discarded and the old establishment gradually edged out of the power structure, there has been a tendency to equate nationhood with the Constitution. This version of ‘constitutional patriotism’ proceeded on the belief that the starting point of Indian existence was Republic Day 1950 — the proverbial Year Zero. India’s inheritance was sought to be covered in a haze.

The Ram temple as a symbol of modern India does not negate the Constitution. Its construction was, after all, sanctioned by the rule of law. What it, however, does is establish a link between an India that has existed from antiquity to the present. It proffers the belief that India is a continuum and seeks to establish the indispensable connect — as Edmund Burke put it — between the living, the dead and the unborn. The ‘modern’ Ram temple establishes an alternative view of civilisational nationhood, a facet of our being that even Jawaharlal Nehru acknowledged but didn’t inject into his scheme of modernity. The Ram temple has the potential to enlarge the Indian imagination beyond transient modernity