Societal collapse, also known as the civilizational collapse is the fall of a complex human society. Possible causes of a societal collapse include natural catastrophe, war, pestilence, and depopulation. A collapsed society may revert to a more primitive state, be absorbed into a stronger society, or completely disappear. Disintegration may be relatively abrupt, like the Maya civilization, or gradual, as in the case of the fall of the Western Roman Empire. Examples of such societal collapses are-- the Anatolian Hittite Empire, the Mycenaean civilization, the Manchus of Manchuria, the Mesoamerican Mayas, the Angkors in Cambodia, the Han and Tang dynasties in China, the Mughal empire, infamously called the "gunpowder empire, the Mali empire and of course, the Phoenician empire which centuries back ruled the Mediterranean, from Cyprus to the Iberian peninsula, before disintegrating into oblivion.

In one of his speeches, Sadguru Jaggi Vasudev said, “In the past we were divided into at least 200 different states; we had 200 political entities; yet we were recognised as one nation. We eat differently; we dress differently; we speak different languages, yet we remain one. What holds us as one nation is the spiritual thread.” Well, truer words could not have been said. Clearly, it was the spiritual strength that kept India intact as a nation, and Hindus as a living civilisation. 

The ancient Greek, Roman and Egyptian civilisations are long dead. You find them on the pages of history books. Not so with the Indian, the Hindu civilisation, which has not only survived but is thriving. What can the Hindu civilisation contribute to the world we are living in and, more importantly, to the world-thought? Sadhguru explained, “Non-imposition of any belief system, and to encourage ‘seeking.’ It does not matter what the scriptures say. It does not matter what the leaders say. Each person, every individual must seek.”
Yes, Hindu Thought, Hindu Mind, Hindu Philosophy does not depend upon any dogma or doctrine. Religious rituals are acknowledged and appreciated, but the "Hindu Mind" also recognises that spirituality is not built upon the platform of such rituals. There is not a single ritual that is enforced upon all Hindus. None. There is no uniformity. This freedom of thought, freedom to express one’s thoughts and beliefs, and to act according to one’s belief, is the survival-secret of the Hindu civilisation, as also its contribution to the world, according to noted spiritual activist, Anand Krishna.

The significance of the Ramayan and Shri Ram, in sustaining and strengthening the Hindu faith, in the face of innumerable onslaughts is, therefore, something that can never be undermined, as it is the binding glue that has shrugged off every form of religious expansionism by supposedly liberal, western forces. The spiritual fervour with which Hindus worship Shri Ram and imbibe his ethos is evident in many respects, especially so with regard to Prabhu Ram's adherence to dharma, said the renowned Kidambi Narayanan, in a discourse. Lord Ram, the prince who later became the king of Ayodhya, after a 14-year long exile in the Dandaka forest, promised his father Dasarath, that he would go to the forest and not stake his claim to the throne. Despite his sibling Bharat's insistence, Shri Ram explained to Bharat that the dharma sastras said that only a father had the right to decide what to do with his property.
That being the case, how could Ram interfere in Dasarath's right to decide who should be the next king of Ayodhya? Moreover, Dasarath was the king, and how could a king's order be disobeyed? Dasarath had also instructed and taught his children and in this sense, he had been an Acharya to them. And one could not disobey one's Acharya. The reason for Dasarath's decisions may have been motivated by his wife, Kaikeyi, but Ram would still do as instructed by his king and his father, said Shri Ram to Bharat. 

 